# Meeting 2024.03.19

## Hosts
* Alessandro Carminati
* Vikas Gupta

## Attendees
* Gabriele Paoloni
* Daniel Weingaertner
* Florian Wuhr
* Igor Stoppa
* Jason
* Mikel Azkarate
* Rob Woolley

## Agenda

* Past items
    * Results of the pool
```
       Kernel address space integrity............................................50
       ##################################################
       Memory allocators.........................................................47
       ###############################################
       Interrupt management......................................................38
       ######################################
       Boot......................................................................30
       ##############################
       Clock timers..............................................................24
       ########################
       Scheduler.................................................................20
       ####################
       Multicore interference....................................................20
       ####################
       Hardware access...........................................................18
       ##################
       Networking................................................................17
       #################
       Security, File system......................................................6
       ######
       6 Voters
```

* Planned agenda
    * **Clarification on System Composition and Analysis Scope**: Some 
      members of the working group are questioning the efficacy of 
      immediately start searching safety concepts to analyze Linux 
      components.
      They argue that we should first define the composition of the
      systems we're examining, as this will dictate our focus areas. 
      Clarifying whether our analysis scope encompasses only Linux or
      includes external systems like safety islands and watchdogs is
      crucial.
    * **Review Poll results for New Safety Strategy and Roadmap Elaboration**:
      The focus has shifted to review the poll results to craft a new strategy
      for safety concepts, following discussions about the roadmap in the
      previous meeting. This strategy will be pivotal for conducting a 
      thorough analysis of Linux components and identifying potential 
      interdependencies. The current roadmap serves as a framework for 
      the working group to generate a list of safety concepts, which will 
      then inform the in-depth analysis process.

## Meeting minute

* Alessandro Carminati Presents a [slides deck](resources/20240402-LFSCS-Meeting.pdf) 
  to drive discussion.
* Igor Stoppa emphasizes the need for clear definitions and specifications in systems 
  and safety measures. He argues that defining what constitutes a system is crucial 
  for making effective safety decisions. Additionally, he stresses the importance of 
  defining safety requirements and basing claims on these requirements.
* Igor Stoppa acknowledges the statement that "System Level Safety claims are out of 
  scope." However, he suggests that without defining the scope, it becomes unclear 
  which actions are influenced by system constraints and which are independent 
  choices.
* Alessandro Carminati presents the poll results, indicating a modest turnout but 
  highlighting memory-related topics as priorities.
* Alessandro Carminati proposes next steps: follow the poll results to address 
  safety claims for various features/kernel components, search for any AoU to 
  support safety claims, formalize kernel safety requirements, and investigate 
  kernel configurations, AoU, and safety requirements.
* Igor Stoppa reiterates the importance of defining systems in advance. 
  He cites an answer he received on the [mailing list](https://lists.elisa.tech/g/linux-features/message/267).
  to support his argument.
* Alessandro Carminati argues Igor's statements are basically the same as stated 
  in the slides.
* Igor Stoppa replies he is slightly changing the subject because he reads in the 
  mailing list statements that people are already assuming AoUs like safety Island.
  Because of this, we need to make these AoUs same for anyone.
* ?Florian Wuhr and the participants agree on the importance of first establishing and 
  agreeing upon the assumptions surrounding the system under analysis before progressing 
  further.
* Alessandro Carminati proposes that since the working group primarily targets Linux, 
  and Linux does not come with any specific reference hardware, one option could be to 
  initially consider a system without any AoUs. 
  Then, during the exploration process, AoUs can be added as it becomes apparent that 
  safety requirements cannot be met otherwise. 
* Igor Stoppa believes that imposing excessive requirements on Linux is not advisable. 
  Linux was not designed with safety as a primary goal, and it is not sought after for 
  its safety features. Its appeal lies in its legacy and the ease of developing 
  applications on it. Overloading it with too many requirements could diminish its appeal. 
  Instead, he suggests that shifting requirements elsewhere would help maintain Linux's 
  attractiveness.
* Rob Woolley inquires whether the group should concentrate solely on a limited set of 
  features or if its scope extends to encompass the entire kernel.
* Alessandro Carminati replies that ideally, the group should prioritize the entire 
  kernel, but it must also recognize the vast amount of code and the pace at which the 
  group can progress. There's a risk that initial results may become outdated while the 
  group is still working. One approach could be to focus on priorities initially and 
  then reassess past items once objectives are achieved.
* Gabriele Paoloni emphasized that the primary focus of the group should revolve around 
  points 3 and 4 of slide 6. He acknowledged that the group shouldn't handle all tasks 
  independently. Instead, there are other groups like OSEP designated to establish 
  safety requirements for use, which partly addresses the first two points on the slide. 
  For instance, Slide 2 addresses many of Igor's concerns. Gabriele highlighted the 
  importance of ensuring that system-level assumptions are agreed upon and validated, 
  possibly by collaborating with other groups like OSEP. 
* Igor Stoppa outlines that the group should primarily focus on two relevant cases: one 
  involving an application requiring safe performance and another concerning a driver 
  with similar requirements.
* Gabriele Paoloni points out, in reference to slide 5, that kernel address space 
  integrity already constitutes a system-level claim that must be adhered to.
* Igor Stoppa responds by cautioning that simply analyzing this requirement might lead 
  to making assumptions, such as three machines working in lockstep, which could 
  automatically fulfill the requirement.
* Gabriele Paoloni suggests that the aim is not to conclude the investigation in this stage. 
  Instead, the approach would involve analyzing each feature individually to generate safety 
  requirements and assumptions of use, focusing on one component at a time. After completing 
  this initial step, the group would then commence the technical investigation.
* Gabriele Paoloni further elaborates that an essential aspect of this preliminary step is 
  to augment the earlier discussion by producing safety requirements. 
  This addition ensures the uniformity and consistency of safety requirements across all 
  component investigations.
* Igor Stoppa responds by noting that specific AoUs might alleviate the need to analyze 
  certain feature/components. Therefore, he emphasizes the importance of specifying these 
  AoUs as a priority.
* Gabriele Paoloni asserts that the preliminary analysis that is proposed inherently 
  involves specifying AoUs; it's simply a matter of executing it.
* Rob Woolley asks clarification regarding the scope of the conversation, particularly 
  concerning memory-related topics, questioning whether focusing on existing memory 
  allocators would suffice or if exploring features like error detection and correction 
  within the kernel would be more appropriate. Rob Woolley suggests that delving into 
  specific features might be a more targeted approach than analyzing the entire kernel. 
* Alessandro Carminati reiterates his understanding of the working group's objective, 
  which is to conduct a thorough analysis of the kernel's features.
* Rob Wooley seeks clarification regarding whether the items listed on the slides should 
  be regarded as features or kernel subsystems.
* Alessandro Carminati confirms that the list corresponds to features, which often overlap 
  with subsystems. He further explains that the list is derived from what he deems 
  important and invites the group to supplement it if anyone finds it incomplete.
* Igor Stoppa emphasizes the importance of determining whether the features listed can be 
  made optional and the associated cost in terms of AoUs. He also highlights the 
  significance of considering security features in this context.
* Alessandro Carminati acknowledges that during the compilation of the list, two items 
  were inadvertently merged together due to a typo. One of these items is the security 
  subsystem, which includes the LSM providing hooks in all kernel subsystems. 
  Additionally, he anticipates that another overlooked subsystem is the tracing 
  subsystem, which also utilizes hooks. However, since it is primarily a debug feature, 
  it may be overlooked in a production system.
* Igor Stoppa proposes that we should consider the various randomizations in the kernel 
  implemented for security reasons. He highlights that these randomizations, by changing 
  the memory layout each time, could potentially reduce the effectiveness of the testing phase.
* Rob Wooley raises a point regarding the influence of running Linux on Xen, particularly how 
  multicore interference can be mitigated by the hypervisor. He questions whether the group is 
  assuming Linux running bare metal on hardware or if considerations like hypervisors are 
  within scope. Rob suggests that Linux should operate similarly whether it's on bare metal or 
  within a hypervisor environment.
* Alessandro Carminati argues that the aim of hypervisors is to ensure that software running 
  in a virtualized environment behaves same as bare metal. If this task is executed effectively, 
  the group could consider the two use cases the same.
* Rob Wooley clarifies that his question was specifically about whether hypervisors will be 
  considered as a potential use case.
* Florian Wuhr suggests considering the hypervisor as one of the AoUs for the system where 
  the goal is to ensure the safe operation of the Linux kernel. 
  He advocates for discussing the role of the hypervisor in the system and addressing any 
  problems that cannot be resolved within the Linux kernel running on baremetal. 
* Gabriele Paoloni remarks that the flow described in the slides does not exclude this 
  approach.
* Daniel Weingaertner￼suggests a slightly modified flow: He proposes starting by defining 
  the AoUs of the system being discussed. 
  Then, when encountering problems that cannot be solved within the system's parameters, 
  exploring alternative solutions or directions should be considered. He emphasizes the 
  importance of keeping all discussions grounded in the initial assumptions to maintain 
  focus on safety claims. If certain claims cannot be fulfilled by the system, openly 
  discussing alternatives like resorting to a safety island or pursuing different 
  approaches is encouraged. 

## Action items
* Define a strategy to get started.
