# Meeting 2024.04.16

## Hosts
* Alessandro Carminati

## Attendees
* Igor Stoppa
* Sebastian Hetze
* Christopher Temple
* Daniel Weingaetner
* Florian Wuhr
* Mikel Azkarate
* Asuka Nagayama

## Topics & Notes

* Past items
    * None

* Planned agenda
    * Finalize the discussion on AoUs [slides](resources/20240416-LFSCS-Meeting.pdf)
    * Address the AoUs to start Kernel address space integrity

## Meeting minute
* Alessandro opens the conversation presenting the slides that summarize
  last meeting conclusions about Weingaertner's proposal.
* The discussion began to evolve and articulate around the concept of how
  AoUs should function as a pipeline. The pipeline for AoU production could
  start in the OSEP WG as the producer and continue in the Architecture WG,
  with LFSCS as consumer.
* The discussion then raised the question: Is LFSCS merely a consumer, or
  should it play an active role in producing them?
* The WG attempted to shift the discussion towards a concrete case we are
  facing: The first topic to address is Kernel address space integrity.
  However, the previous discussion resurfaced once more.
* Returning to the topic, if other WGs are involved in the process, it is
  crucial to establish a clear and reliable communication channel and define
  the flow through which this information needs to run.
* The discussion considers a hypothetical scenario where no other WGs are
  involved. This is because if the process requires LFSCS to retrieve
  information to initiate discussions, the WG could be blocked while waiting
  for this information to flow. The only prerequisite is that once preliminary
  objectives are achieved, they should be feed backed to other WGs for future
  refinement.
* Eventually, the discussion evolved into how to provide a particular resource,
  such as a watchdog, in a standardized manner. Upon examining hardware
  offerings, it became apparent that silicon providers implement the same
  feature in various ways, often lacking uniformity. This led to a discussion
  about achieving uniformity in implementation, such as through the provision
  of a reference implementation.
* The discussion shifted from providing a specific hardware feature in a
  standardized manner to making this feature available for people to use and
  experiment with. A hot topic emerged regarding the use of QEMU for testing
  not only the software but also the hardware reference implementations.
* During the discussion, some concerns were raised regarding the LFSCS's
  focus  primarily on the kernel and less on ensuring the safety of
  applications running in userspace. This prompted the question of what
  constitutes the "Linux" in "Linux Feature for Safety Critical Systems."
  Some consider Linux to be solely the kernel, while others advocate for
  extending the definition to include all companion userspace components.
  Regardless, the safety of userspace applications is closely related with
  kernel safety. It is indeed possible to enhance the safety of a userspace
  application from within the application itself, but this approach does not
  address Linux safety comprehensively. As a WG, our mandate is to investigate
  Linux safety, and ensuring the safety of an application that independently
  builds its safety measures falls outside of our scope.

## Action items
* contact Paul on the information flows about wgs.
