# Meeting 2024.03.19

## Hosts
* Alessandro Carminati
* Vikas Gupta

## Attendees
* Rob Wooley
* Nagayama Asuka
* Daniel Weingaertner
* Igor Stoppa
* Florian Wuhr
* Gabriele Paoloni
* Christofer Temple
* Mikel Azkarate

## Topics & Notes

* Past items
    * None

* Planned agenda
    * Wg [Roadmap](https://github.com/elisa-tech/wg-lfscs/lfscs-meetings/resources/Linux.Features.for.Safety-Critical.Systems.activities.summary.pdf) presentation
    * Discuss lfscs Members' [contribution](https://lists.elisa.tech/g/linux-features/topic/restarting_lfscs_operations/104771070) to the roadmap.

## Meeting minute

* Wg Roadmap presentation
    * Alessandro Presented himself
    * Vikas presented himself
    * Wg [Roadmap](https://github.com/elisa-tech/wg-lfscs/lfscs-meetings/resources/Linux.Features.for.Safety-Critical.Systems.activities.summary.pdf) presentation
        * Mikel: Any timeline? Is this work targeted at 1-10 years?
        * Alessandro: It makes no sense to have the work spread in long timeline, Linux is a rapidly changing software, our result might suffer [TOCTOU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time-of-check_to_time-of-use)
        * Igor: Linux is not safe, if we have other means e.g., watchdog or safe island, probably it make no sense to check certain components.
        * Gabriele: As for the boot discussion, it makes sense, despite the method to use to qualify Linux, to analyze what the component does, and understand what can go wrong.
        * Igor: Suggests to deprioritize components that can be monitored with external components/hardware.
        * Gabriele: To understand what can be deprioritized, you need to analyze the system.
        * Chris: Perhaps we can just agree on priorities and rearrange components analysis to comply with new priorities.

* Discuss lfscs Members' contribution to the roadmap.

## Action items
* prepare a poll to query lfscs members about opinion about component priority
* find a new ordered list, according with the poll result.
