# Meeting 2024.06.25

## Hosts
* Alessandro Carminati

## Attendees
* Igor Stoppa
* Daniel Weingaertner
* Florian Wuhr
* Daniel Weingaertner
* Christofer Temple
* Sebastian Hetze

## Topics & Notes

* Planned agenda
    * TSC and Architecture WG agree tyni config is probably not the best option.
    * No points against Qemu aarch64 as reference platform, but no decision 
      is taken yet.
    * [Architecture WG](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wxPKJMiUP7RHU7GMEtsHL0DwMZukBf4q/edit)
      require us to get a discussion over the features required by a minimal
      userspace program to run. 
    * Discussion over a [minimal application](https://gist.github.com/alessandrocarminati/3def436774839d3bce1ad99b9cbb7628):
        * execve
        * context switch 
    
## Meeting minute
* alessandro Present the [slides]() to fire the discussion.
* alessandro shows that a simple application that does nothing can produce
  a fairly elaborated executable, that uses far more with respect to the
  features we intend to take care. 
* Alessandro shows why it is so, and what can be done to mend this
  situation.
* slides presentation terminates with a strategy on how to create an executable
  suitable with the specifications the wg had for this task.
* The presentation demostrated that also analyzing a simple program that
  does nothing, requires somehow to have an architecture selected.
  Context switch in linux happens in just two events: syscalls return code
  and interrupt return code, which are both very architecture dependent code.
* Igor: highligh that if the process is init, we may release some requirements. 
* Igor: Also objects that the analysis won't be so easy as anticipated, because
  the lazy allocation Linux have will incur in a series of memory faults.
* Alessandro answers that if for the init process, this would be accurate,
  for a genearal, non init process, the process might not be such as been described.
  Linux typocal execution, is based on the Unix paradigm fork/exec, so that
  the fork provides a basic environment where operate by just duplicating the
  parent address space, and the exec take care of create the minimal suitable 
  environment for the process to run. these two, togheter with the fact that porcess
  does basically nothing, should be enoug to not require any additional work from
  the OS.
* Igor and Alessandro debate about the fact that additional work from operating 
  system's needed.
* Gabriele suggests do things a step of time, and not waste time in discussing details. 
* Alessandro: takes the action item of produce the trace of the minimal program.
* The group discusses about what to expect from the minimal program.
* operating system is suposed to:
    * Load the program in memory
    * set the program counter to the start of the program
    * stack area needs to be allocated
    * stack pointer needs to point to an appropriate location
    * not expected by this program, but provided by the os:
        * the bottom of the stack is populated with the command line arguments
        * following argv, there is the enviroment variables




## Action items
* produce a mean to trace min
