# Meeting 2024.05.14

## Hosts
* Alessandro Carminati

## Attendees
* Igor Stoppa
* Daniel Weingaertner
* Florian Wuhr
* Mikel Azkarate

## Topics & Notes

* Planned agenda
    * Lund workshop items
    * Discussion tiny config topic.
      [slides](./resorces/20240611-LFSCS-Meeting.pdf)
    
## Meeting minute
* Alessandro starts the meeting by presenting the slides.
* Alessandro presents his arguments against using tiny config:
    * Tiny config is too minimal and does not contribute value to the goal
      of finding a suitable configuration for our work.
    * Tiny config consists of only four lines, which is significantly fewer
      than the number of items required by the Linux kernel build system to
      build a kernel.
    * The required but unspecified items are defined by the architecture 
      default, which is the set of default items for a given architecture.
    * Leaving the majority of the configuration to be decided by the
      architecture default is neither practical nor wise.
      Configuration can vary between architectures, and even within the same
      architecture, configuration can change according to the architecture
      defaults.
    * It is worth noting that throughout the versions, config symbols can be
      renamed, deleted, or added.
    * Many required symbols are architecture-dependent, and even if mandatory
      for a given architecture, they may be missing in others.
    * Some symbols not included in the tiny config are only formally mandatory.
      FUTEX is one such example. The kernel can be compiled without it, but 
      then several features commonly expected in Linux will not work.
    * At the end of this short presentation, Alessandro concluded by stating
      that no configuration can be selected or proposed without first defining
      the target platform.
* Igor added that a similar topic arose in OSEP.
* Alessandro added that he will raise the warning in the TSC as well.
* Igor: Agreed with the previous statements. (This made my day.)
* Alessandro proposes AArch64 QEMU as a reference platform.
* Alessandro explains why he prefers AArch64 over the more ubiquitous x86.
* AArch64 firmware does not usually provide functionalities, whereas x86 has 
  many functionalities provided by firmware, which makes the use case more
  complex.
* Alessandro explains why QEMU is a good choice, mentioning that a few silicon
  vendors are starting to implement VIRTIO specifications in silicon.
* VMM implements virtual hardware in userspace. Having a silicon implementation
  of the virtual hardware would allow for the reuse of much of the work.
* Alessandro mentions [libblkio](https://gitlab.com/libblkio/libblkio) as an 
  example of supporting hardware peripherals that implement VIRTIO in hardware.
* Mikel asks about the next steps and specifically when the WG will start 
  working on actual features.
* Alessandro answers that to start working on features, we need to have all
  assumptions of use defined, and the kernel configuration is a huge question
  mark that needs to be solved.
* As an example, Alessandro mentions hardware features such as x86’s SMEP/SMAP
  and ARM’s PXN/PAN, which prevent the kernel from accessing and/or executing 
  userspace memory. The use of these features is governed by elements in the 
  configuration.
* Alessandro: FYI SOAFEE community do have a reference hardware.
* Igor suggests that RISCV is another option we might want to consider.
* Alessandro replied that RISCV could be a more complex use case. RISCV
  architecture is still WIP, not sure they have decided how to do 
  virtualization, more important, in RISCV, the ISA is only defined after you
  specify a SoC. 
  One of the peculiar points of RISCV is that silicon vendors can expand the 
  instruction set to make the SoC more specific to the application it needs 
  to cover. In such cases, the use case would also require fixing the 
  instruction set and considering the toolchain qualification implications.
* Igor asks about how to include Xen in the discussion.
* Alessandro asks why Xen and not KVM, which is part of Linux, and mentions a 
  [paper](https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~nieh/pubs/ieeesp2021_kvm.pdf) that 
  claims it is possible to formally verify KVM: link.
* Mikel remarks that having a hypervisor in the picture can help our efforts.
* Alessandro adds that hypervisors in the ARM world are a complex matter. 
  Vendors reserve their usage, implementing the hypervisor in firmware.
* Alessandro is against considering EL2 in the ARM use case because it would
  open the gate to more problematic topics like EL3 and the secure world, 
  which are peculiar to the ARM world and not open, thus not allowing a lot 
  of considerations.

## Action items
 * Alessandro: present tiny config issue to the TSC.
