# Meeting 2024.07.09

## Hosts
* Alessandro Carminati

## Attendees
* Igor Stoppa
* Gabriele Paoloni
* Christopher Temple
* Mikel Azkarate
* Vivith Parlattaya

## Topics & Notes

* action items: propose a way to trace min app.
* Planned agenda
    * Continue discussion over a [minimal application](https://github.com/alessandrocarminati/min_prog_trace).
    
## Meeting minute
* Alessandro shows the minimal trace PoC he prepared to demonstrate a minimal
  app being traced.
* Alessandro presents the results of the tracing.
* Alessandro acknowledges Igor's statement from the previous meeting about
  page faults during normal operations.
* The demonstration generated some discussion. Igor highlighted how these
  results were expected by him.
* Igor and Alessandro try to reconstruct the actions taken by the kernel to
  execute the application. They delve into the details of the binfmt_elf.
* The essence of the conversation highlights how intricate the support needed
  is, even for a very minimal program, ranging from the memory management
  subsystem down to the block device.
* Igor requests a feature in the KS-NAV to be able to print the path between
  two functions.
* Analyzing the results from the trace, it is evident that as the block
  device gets involved, things like the filesystem come into play.
* This fact highlights once more how even a simple scenario, such as the
  one under analysis, needs to have a completely defined configuration.
* Alessandro suggests repeating the test in an aarch64 emulator, using a
  cpio image as the backing filesystem.
* Since the demo Alessandro made also requires the kernel tracing system,
  which is not part of any minimal configuration, he asks if anyone is
  against his arbitrary choice to repeat the test for the next meeting
  with a minimal config that includes kernel tracing features. No one is
  against it.

## Action items
* repeat the test in a minimal system


