# Meeting 2024.10.01

## Hosts
* Alessandro Carminati

## Attendees
* Igor Stoppa
* Yanmei Guo
* Daniel Weingaertner
* Mikel Azkarate
* Florian Wuhr

## Topics & Notes
* OSS-EU & Plumbers report
* Review action items: `chacha_block_generic`
* Review action items: minimal configuration
* Continue discussion over the kernel essentials to
  run a bare minimal app.

## Meeting minute
* Alessandro reports news from OSS and Plumbers
    * Fair attendance at the OSS safety talks.
    * Fair attendance at the Linux Plumbers Conference.
    * The Kernel Documentation talk at Plumbers was a great success. Several 
      Linux kernel maintainers were present at the same table, including 
      **Thomas Gleixner** and **Steven Rostedt**. 
     Elisa successfully highlighted the need for formal documentation in the 
     upstream kernel and convinced the audience of its importance for 
     automated testing. She was appointed to create a PoC and a template for 
     the new documentation.
* Yanmei presents work on minimal configurations
    * Yanmei shows a report, the result of a script checking the configuration 
      proposed as [minimal config](https://github.com/Boeing/linux/commit/f5d4b42051b045fb667d69eeb0272a89dde6ba20)
      in the aerospace working group. 
      According to the report, this configuration fails the automated check by 
      the [safety_checker](https://github.com/elisa-tech/kconfig-safety-check)
      script.
    * Yanmei seeks the team's opinions on several items.
    * The team clarifies that the objective is to finalize the minimal config 
      and then add safety features on top of it.
    * Alessandro reports to the team about `get_random_u16` usage inside the 
      `arch_align_stack` function.

* Alessandro explains that this issue is not due to a configuration item but 
  rather depends on a tunable item in sysfs.
    * Essentially, while it may be possible to avoid the `chacha_block_generic` 
      function in this case, it is not possible to entirely prevent it from 
      being in the code.
    * Another takeaway from this conversation is that config items control 
      which code is included in the kernel image, but there's another 
      mechanism that regulates which code in the image gets used.
    * This aspect, along with the broader randomization argument, needs to 
      be discussed with a wider audience.
    * Alessandro will bring this issue to the TSC to spread the topic across 
      other working groups and gather input.

## Action items
* Introduce randomization vs safety in the TSC
