# Meeting 2024.07.23

## Hosts
* Alessandro Carminati

## Attendees
* Mikel Azkarate
* Vivith Parlattaya
* Sebastian Hetze
* Daniel Weingaetner
* Florian Wuhr
* Quasim
* Philipp Ahmann

## Topics & Notes
* find the minimal kernel function used by a simple application that just 
  gets executed.
    
## Meeting minute
* Sebastian asks if ks-nav can analyze anything other than the Linux Kernel. 
  In particular, Sebastian is interested in glibc.
* Alessandro answers that technically, the strategy used by ks-nav to explore
  executables could allow for that, but ks-nav is currently tuned to deal with
  the kernel.
* Sebastian says that Bosh folks use strace extensively to understand which 
  syscalls are triggered.
* Alessandro answers that strace might not be the right tool since it deals
  with software in execution.
  To perform a safety analysis, you need to know all the syscalls that can be
  called, not only the ones that are called in a particular situation.
  An approach like ks-nav, which employs static analysis, is more appropriate.
* Tools like [sysfinder](https://github.com/alessandrocarminati/sysfinder_go)
  might be more appropriate, but this one is not currently maintained.
  Additionally, the [sys_no](https://github.com/alessandrocarminati/sys_no)
  repo hosts software that reports the number and type of syscalls a binary
  function uses.
* Alessandro presents the [demo](https://github.com/alessandrocarminati/min_prog_trace)
  he prepared for the meeting. The objective is to recover the kernel subsystems
  that are touched by the execution of a very simple application.
  The demo aims to start the application in a very small Linux environment where
  the kernel has a very limited set of features, possibly the bare minimum for
  the task. In this context, the software gets traced and the trace is saved for
  further analysis.
* The output of the trace is discussed among the participants, and a critical
  point emerges: interrupts that add random-like functions to the list of 
  functions used by the minimal app.
* Alessandro takes the action item to refine the tracing app to minimize the
  function set added by interrupts to the list.

## Action items
* Alessandro: improve min_prog_trace app.

