# Meeting 2024.08.20

## Hosts
* Alessandro Carminati

## Attendees
* Mikel Azkarate
* Igor Stoppa
* Gabriele Paoloni
* Daniel Weingaertner
* Sebastian Hetze
* Florian Wuhr

## Topics & Notes
* Continue discussion over the kernel essentials to
  run a bare minimal app.

## Meeting minute
* Alessandro presented a live demo of the improved [min_prog_trace](https://github.com/alessandrocarminati/min_prog_trace).
  In the previous version, interrupts caused interference. Interrupt handling 
  functions were appearing in the trace, making it difficult to distinguish 
  application activity from interrupt-related events. 
  The new version improves interrupt handling by routing all non-timer 
  interrupts to a separate CPU. This reduces the impact of interrupts on 
  the application trace.
* Alessandro with the help of the lfscs team analyze the trace.
  lists the function called and translate them to subsystems using ks-nav 
  database.  
* Igor notices some unexpected in the [results](./resources/log7.gz), 
  crypto appears to be in the [list of subsystem](./resources/subsystems.log7.txt) 
  used, but it is unexpected.
* Investigating more, the `chacha_block_generic` appear to be responsible
  of the crypto subsystem presence.
* a summary investigation made showed some incongruencies.
    1. the kernel configuration is not that minimal as expected.
    2. in this non minimal configuration that do have some crypto switches 
       turned on, the chacha switch appear to be off.

## Action items
* Alessandro will explain the `chacha_block_generic` presence.
* Alessandro will explain the `CONFIG_HOTPLUG_CPU`
* Team will watch at the minimal config
