# Meeting 2024.04.30

## Hosts
* Alessandro Carminati

## Attendees
* Igor Stoppa
* Daniel Weingaetner
* Florian Wuhr
* Mikel Azkarate
* Gabriele Paoloni
* Christopher Temple

## Topics & Notes

* Past items
    * None

* Planned agenda
    * Review TSC discussion about AoU [outcome](https://github.com/elisa-tech/tsc/wiki/24-Apr-2024)
        * LFSCS WG has yet to evaluate a feature as it lacks a system 
          definition to focus, highlighting the need for a clear understanding
          of AoU. 
        * While LFSCS may consume AoU externally, they may also develop them 
          internally, with a requirement to provide feedback.
        * Feedback is meant to be back-propagated using Basil.
        * Basil needs an architecture definition document, which will be one 
          of our outcomes in any feature analysis.
    * Start the discussion for the architecture document.
        * One document for all the features.
        * Different documents for each feature.
    * Define Safety Goals for the "kernel address space integrity"
        * Enumerate Kernel safety claims for this specific case
        * Which assumed Kernel safety requirements or AoUs can be defined to
          meet System Safety claims?

## Meeting minute
    * Alessandro summarized the situation, explaining that he raised the 
      issue of Assumption of Use and requirements during the TSC meeting.
      The outcome of the debate was that the WG cannot depend on receiving
      the necessary information but must instead provide it themselves.
      Furthermore, for consistency, this information needs to be 
      back-propagated.
      TSC plans to use the Basil tool to share these info, and also create 
      a new, TSC vice chair who would be in charge of coordinating the WG.
    * Alessandro brings up Sebastian's concern from the previous meeting to
      the audience. Essentially, Sebastian is questioning whether focusing
      solely on the kernel in the debate is sufficient.
      He argues that other components of GNU Linux can be also used to cope
      with safety issues and deserve broader consideration.
    * Igor adds that Sebastian may not be entirely disinterested in the 
      Linux kernel. He simply wants to supplement parts that are not covered
      by the kernel, such as GPU workloads.
    * Daniel, who works in the same group as Sebastian, confirms that
      Sebastian is interested in expanding the WG's scope beyond the Linux
      Kernel. He wants to include software that can complement the kernel in
      scenarios where ensuring the safety of the Linux kernel is not feasible.
      In the railway use case they are dealing with, there are situations
      where ensuring safety solely through the Linux Kernel is not practical.
      Daniel adds that even if the WG doesn't make software other than the
      kernel its primary objective, he would like the group to at least
      consider these alternatives in scenarios where ensuring safety through
      the kernel is not viable.
    * Florian engages in a debate about the mission of our community, 
      essentially arguing that despite Linux (kernel) being the focus, our 
      mission is to enable applications within Linux. Therefore, safety 
      resources can originate from outside the kernel. As an example, he 
      brings the elektrobit safe Linux, that provide safety not through the 
      kernel, but using an hypervisor mechanism.
    * Alessandro agrees with some of the points raised during the conversation,
      such as considering alternatives when safety cannot be ensured solely
      through the kernel. However, he notes that the primary objective remains
      Linux, the kernel.
    * WG started to debate safety goals for the kernel address space integrty.
    * Igor suggests to include into these consideration both kernel space
      drivers and userspace applications that we consider in the safety scope.
    * Alessandro thinks that the goroup is not yet ready for drivers 
      considerations and should remain generic. Switching to a driver implies
      considering additional complications such as DMA.
    * Alessandro proposes: "Kernel needs to enforce variables scope"
    * Igor argues that buffers, commonly used to exchange data between
      subsystems, are variables and violate this statement by design.
      He proposes changing the statement to something like "as intended."
    * Gabriele replies that "as intended" demands more than just safety.
      Integrity claims cannot simply require "as intended." They can't expect
      a function to interpret data correctly. Integrity only imposes conditions
      on data management: how it is allocated, retrieved, and written.
    * Gabriele thinks we should considerate different scenarios: 
      When memory is allocated, we should make sure, for example that it is not
      already used.
    * Gabriele proposes a new statements to add:
      "when allocating a reserved buffer the kernel should make sure the same
      is not in use already" related, "when we invoke free a virtual address
      space, the buffer should be freed"
    * Igor adds that while this is theoretically sound, the practical machinery
      these allocators employ is more complex, making these statements
      difficult to verify. Although the kernel does have mechanisms like
      lockdep or kfence, they are not designed to function beyond debug
      scenarios.
    * Gabriele responds that the intention here is simply to state
      requirements, not to provide evidence on how they can be enforced.
    * Gabriele initiated a discussion around the requirement listed on the
      screen, "Kernel needs to enforce variable scope." Eventually, he agrees
      that enforcing variable boundaries is indeed necessary.
    * Igor proposes for this task continuation to postpone dynamic allocation
      and consider solely link time allocation.

## Itmes produced during the meeting.
    * toplevel: the kernel should guarantee memory integrity along the 
                different phases of the kernel thread life cycle.
      derivate: the kernel allocator mechanism should guarantee that 
                when a new buffer is allocated the same is reserved for 
                the driver/subsystem
      derivate: Kernel needs to enforce variables scope

## Action items
    * prepare a list of claims to discuss next meeting link time.


